README.md, before:

# tempEgo

tempEgo is a Python package for calculating the 2D ego-motion velocity of a sensing platform from 2D millimetre-wave (mmWave) radar data. This package implements the ego-motion estimation methods detailed in [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added).


The three methods are:
* KB: Traditional ego-motion estimation technique as detailed in D. Kellner et al., "[Instantaneous ego-motion estimation using doppler radar](https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2013.6728341)," in 16th ITSC, 2013, pp. 869–874
* TEMPSAC: TEMporal SAmpling Consensus implements a weighted sliding window of sensor measurements biasing the algorithm to estimate the velocity using newer samples in time.
* TWLSQ: Temporally Weighted Least Squares implements a sliding window and temporal weighting scheme for model fitting.

## Prerequisites
A method of supplying this package with mmWave data, either using a physical sensor or a pre-existing dataset. 

For use with the Coloradar dataset please install the desired dataset from [here](https://arpg.github.io/coloradar/). For out of the box usage of this package with the Coloradar dataset follow the directory structure implemented [here](https://github.com/azinke/coloradar.git). If you do not need the extra functionality of the coloradar_package simply clone the repository to get the correct directory structure. 


## Installation

Use the package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) to install [tempEgo](https://pypi.org/project/tempEgo/).

```bash
pip install tempEgo
```
or

Clone the Github Repository

Prereq: [Git installation](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/samuelLovett/tempEgo.git
cd tempEgo
pip install .
```



## Usage

The _main.py_ script provides an example of how to use each velocity estimation method.

**Hyperparameters:**

Shared:
* n: Minimum number of data points to estimate parameters
* k: Maximum iterations allowed
* epsilon: Threshold value to determine if points are fit well
* z: Number of close data points required to assert model fits well

TEMPSAC & TWLSQ:
* buffer_size: Size of the sliding window (m)
* fff_lambda: fixed forgetting factor as defined in (14) of [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added). 0 uses only the most recent samples and 1 uses all samples equally.

To change the from the values presented in [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added), change their definition within the _set_kb()_ , _set_tempsac()_ , _set_twlsq()_ methods.

## Results

Comparison of average absolute pose error for different environments. The average absolute pose error is presented in metres.

| Algorithm  | Edgar Classroom Dataset | Intelligent Robotic Lab Dataset  | Edgar Army tunnel Dataset |
| ------------- |:-------------:| ------------- |:-------------:|
| TEMPSAC      | 2.812     | 2.352      | **5.615**     |
| TWLSQ      | **2.338**     | **2.166**      | 5.653     |
| KB      | 3.644     | 3.603      | 5.672     |

The average absolute pose error for 100 trials is shown in the above Table. Both our methods outperform KB, with TEMPSAC showing an average improvement of 19.5% and TWLSQ showing an average improvement of 25.3%.



![The results figure from Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC.](/results_figure.png)

A comparison of the results generated by TEMPSAC (blue), TWLSQ (green), and KB (red) over EC (left), IRL (centre), and EA (right) datasets. The top panel shows the _xy_ trajectories, the middle panel shows the absolute pose error over time, and the bottom panel shows the average absolute pose error for the 100 trials. TEMPSAC and TWLSQ outperform KB.


## A Note on Potential Errors

If you get an error along the lines of 
```
File "C:\path-to-package\tempEgo\dataset_loaders.py", line *some number*, in *some function*
    t, r = read_tf_file(tf_filename)
TypeError: cannot unpack non-iterable NoneType object
```
It is likely being caused by a path error to a file within the dataset (like the config file or the path to the dataset itself). 

## License

[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)

Commit message:

Update README.md to include citation and acknowledgement

README.md, after:

# tempEgo

tempEgo is a Python package for calculating the 2D ego-motion velocity of a sensing platform from 2D millimetre-wave (mmWave) radar data. This package implements the three ego-motion estimation methods detailed in [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added).


The three methods are:
* KB: Traditional ego-motion estimation technique as detailed in D. Kellner et al., "[Instantaneous ego-motion estimation using doppler radar](https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2013.6728341)," in 16th ITSC, 2013, pp. 869–874
* TEMPSAC: TEMporal SAmpling Consensus implements a weighted sliding window of sensor measurements biasing the algorithm to estimate the velocity using newer samples in time.
* TWLSQ: Temporally Weighted Least Squares implements a sliding window and temporal weighting scheme for model fitting.



## Prerequisites
A method of supplying this package with mmWave data, either using a physical sensor or a pre-existing dataset. 

For use with the Coloradar dataset please install the desired dataset from [here](https://arpg.github.io/coloradar/). For out of the box usage of this package with the Coloradar dataset follow the directory structure implemented [here](https://github.com/azinke/coloradar.git). If you do not need the extra functionality of the coloradar_package simply clone the repository to get the correct directory structure. 


## Installation

Use the package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) to install [tempEgo](https://pypi.org/project/tempEgo/).

```bash
pip install tempEgo
```
or

Clone the Github Repository

Prereq: [Git installation](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/samuelLovett/tempEgo.git
cd tempEgo
pip install .
```



## Usage

The _main.py_ script provides an example of how to use each velocity estimation method.

**Hyperparameters:**

Shared:
* n: Minimum number of data points to estimate parameters
* k: Maximum iterations allowed
* epsilon: Threshold value to determine if points are fit well
* z: Number of close data points required to assert model fits well

TEMPSAC & TWLSQ:
* buffer_size: Size of the sliding window (m)
* fff_lambda: fixed forgetting factor as defined in (14) of [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added). 0 uses only the most recent samples and 1 uses all samples equally.

To change the from the values presented in [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added), change their definition within the _set_kb()_ , _set_tempsac()_ , _set_twlsq()_ methods.

## Results

Comparison of average absolute pose error for different environments. The average absolute pose error is presented in metres.

| Algorithm  | Edgar Classroom Dataset | Intelligent Robotic Lab Dataset  | Edgar Army tunnel Dataset |
| ------------- |:-------------:| ------------- |:-------------:|
| TEMPSAC      | 2.812     | 2.352      | **5.615**     |
| TWLSQ      | **2.338**     | **2.166**      | 5.653     |
| KB      | 3.644     | 3.603      | 5.672     |

The average absolute pose error for 100 trials is shown in the above Table. Both our methods outperform KB, with TEMPSAC showing an average improvement of 19.5% and TWLSQ showing an average improvement of 25.3%.



![The results figure from Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC.](/results_figure.png)

A comparison of the results generated by TEMPSAC (blue), TWLSQ (green), and KB (red) over EC (left), IRL (centre), and EA (right) datasets. The top panel shows the _xy_ trajectories, the middle panel shows the absolute pose error over time, and the bottom panel shows the average absolute pose error for the 100 trials. TEMPSAC and TWLSQ outperform KB.


## A Note on Potential Errors

If you get an error along the lines of 
```
File "C:\path-to-package\tempEgo\dataset_loaders.py", line *some number*, in *some function*
    t, r = read_tf_file(tf_filename)
TypeError: cannot unpack non-iterable NoneType object
```
It is likely being caused by a path error to a file within the dataset (like the config file or the path to the dataset itself). 

## License

[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)

## Acknowledgement
I would like to acknowledge the support of the [bioMechatronics Lab](https://biomechatronics.ca/) as well as my supervisors Dr. Carlos Rossa and Dr. Sreeraman Rajan in the creation of [Enhancing Doppler Ego-Motion Estimation: A Temporally Weighted Approach to RANSAC](link to be added).
 

## Citation
When citing our work please use:

```
Citation to be added
```
